>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 5: THOUSANDS
OF MIGRANTS FROM AFRICA AND THE
MIDDLE EAST ARE ON THE MOVE IN
EUROPE AS THE EUROPEAN UNION
DEBATES WHAT TO DO NEXT; HOW THE
SORDID BUSINESS OF SMUGGLING
PEOPLE ACROSS BORDERS HAS BECOME
A GROWTH INDUSTRY; AND HERE IN
THE U.S., THE CHALLENGES OF
PROSECUTING SEXUAL ASSAULT
CRIMES ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART, IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
BY BUS, BY TRAIN AND ON FOOT,
THOUSANDS OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES ARE ON THE MOVE ACROSS
EUROPE.
AFTER DAYS BEING HELD BACK, AT
LEAST 6,500 MIGRANTS CROSSED
FROM HUNGARY INTO NEIGHBORING
AUSTRIA TODAY, WITH SEVERAL
THOUSANDS CONTINUING WEST,
HOPING TO REACH MUNICH, GERMANY.
HUNDREDS MORE WHO DID NOT BOARD
THE HUNGARIAN BUSES AND TRAINS
BEGAN WALKING THE 100 MILES FROM
BUDAPEST TOWARD VIENNA.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAID TODAY EVERY ASYLUM SEEKER
ARRIVING IN HER COUNTRY WILL GET
A FAIR HEARING, AND THERE IS NO
CAP ON THE NUMBER GERMANY WILL
ACCEPT.
THE JOURNEY OVER LAND COMES
AFTER PEOPLE TYPICALLY LEAVING
FROM WAR-TORN SYRIA, LIBYA, IRAQ
AND AFGHANISTAN ARRIVE ON THE
CONTINENT BY BOAT.
2,500 MIGRANTS WHO MADE IT THIS
WEEK TO GREECE WERE FERRIED
TODAY FROM A REFUGEE STATION ON
THE ISLAND OF LESBOS TO ATHENS.
>> DIFFICULT.
THERE IS SHORTAGE IN WATER.
WE HAVE KIDS, WE HAVE SMALL
BABIES.
WE HAVE A SHORTAGE IN ALL KIND
OF SERVICE.
>> Stewart: THE DESIRED
DESTINATIONS FOR THE MIGRANTS
VARY.
GERMANY IS GRANTING ASYLUM TO
THE MOST REFUGEES AND EXPECTS TO
WELCOME AS MANY AS 800,000 BY
YEAR'S END.
WE GET MORE NOW FROM I.T.N.
REPORTER JAMES MATES.
>> Reporter: 2:00 IN THE
MORNING, AND QUITE SUDDENLY
THEIR ORDEAL IN HUNGARY WAS
OVER.
JUST THREE HOURS AFTER THE
HUNGARIAN GOVERNMENT FINALLY
BACKED DOWN, THE BUSES WERE
BEING LOADED.
FOR FIVE DAYS, THEY'D LIVED IN
SQUALOR OUTSIDE BUDAPEST
STATION.
NOW THEY WERE ON THE MOVE AND
THEY WERE HAPPY.
>> I FEEL REALLY AWESOME.
IT'S GREAT, YEAH.
I'M REALLY HAPPY THAT THESE
BUSES ARE GOING TO GO TO
AUSTRIA.
>> GERMANY.
>> Reporter: AND WITH THAT, IT
WAS OFF TO THE AUSTRIAN BORDER
AND BEYOND, A JOURNEY MANY
THOUGHT MIGHT END IN HUNGARY
WILL NOW TAKE THEM TO GERMANY,
WHERE THEY BELIEVE THEY'LL BE
WELCOMED AND GIVEN THE CHANCE OF
A NEW LIFE.
BEHIND THEM, IN THE UNDERGROUND
CONCOURSE THEY CALLED HOME, LAY
THE DETRITUS OF A NOW-
ABANDONED REFUGEE CAMP.
FROM BESIDE THE MOTORWAY, THE
WEARY MARCHERS WHO'D SET OFF
ON FOOT MANY PUNISHING HOURS
EARLIER WERE PICKED UP FROM
WHERE THEY SLEPT.
THEY'D HAVE TO WALK NO LONGER,
BUT THEIR DECISION TO GO ON
ALONE HAD CLEARLY PUSHED THE
AUTHORITIES INTO BACKING DOWN.
AND NOT A MOMENT TOO SOON AS
TORRENTIAL RAIN SWEPT THROUGH.
BY EARLY MORNING, THEY WERE
ACROSS THE BORDER AND WAITING
PATIENTLY FOR A TRAIN THAT WOULD
TAKE THEM WEST OR NORTH.
THEY DIDN'T CARE WHICH, AS LONG
AS IT WAS TO GERMANY.
THE INHABITANTS OF THE BORDER
TOWN OF NICKELSDORF HAD LAID OUT
FOOD, DRINK, EVEN A SELECTION OF
SECONDHAND CLOTHING.
IN SMALL, WELL-ORGANIZED GROUPS,
FAMILIES FIRST, THEY WERE
ALLOWED ON TO A TRAIN, THIS ONE
TO VIENNA.
IN THEIR EXCITEMENT, SOME RAN TO
THE CARRIAGES, ALTHOUGH, IN
TRUTH, THERE WAS LITTLE NEED.
>> THANK YOU.
VERY, VERY HAPPY.
>> Reporter: BACK IN HUNGARY,
THERE ARE MANY THOUSANDS MORE
STILL WAITING TO COME.
100 BUSES HAVE BEEN PROMISED.
THAT MAY NOT BE ENOUGH.
THIS MORNING, NOT PREPARED TO
WAIT, ANOTHER GROUP SET OFF TO
WALK TO THE BORDER, THOUGH THIS
TIME THEY MAY NOT HAVE TO TRUDGE
AS FAR.
IN MUNICH, THE FIRST WAVE OF
THIS EXODUS STEPPED ON TO GERMAN
SOIL WITH A WAVE AND A SMILE.
AND NO WONDER-- A JOURNEY THAT
FREQUENTLY STARTED IN SYRIA TOOK
IN TURKEY, GREECE, MACEDONIA,
SERBIA, HUNGARY, AUSTRIA, NOW AT
AN END.
>> Stewart: NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM BRABANT IS
COVERING THE SURGE OF MIGRANTS
INTO NORTHERN EUROPE AND HOW
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES ARE
TREATING THE CRISIS DIFFERENTLY.
THIS WEEK, A SYRIAN REFUGEE NOW
IN SWEDEN TOLD HIM ABOUT HIS
JOURNEY ACROSS THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA, LEAVING HIS FAMILY BEHIND.
>> HOW CAN I BRING MY CHILDREN
TO HERE?
I CAN'T MAKE... PUT HIM IN THIS
BOAT, DANGEROUS BOAT.
I CAN'T DO THAT.
FOR ME, MAYBE IT'S OKAY.
BUT FOR MY CHILDREN, IT'S
IMPOSSIBLE.
>> Stewart: MALCOLM BRABANT
JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK.
MALCOLM, IN TIMES OF DANGER, THE
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM IS TO GET
THE CHILDREN OUT, GET THEM TO A
SAFER PLACE.
BUT FROM YOUR REPORTING, THE
OPPOSITE SEEMS TRUE IN THIS
SITUATION.
WHY IS THAT?
>> Reporter: WELL, I THINK
THAT PARENTS ARE GENUINELY
TERRIFIED OF THE DANGERS IN
THE MEDITERRANEAN.
AS HE WAS SAYING, IT'S
ABSOLUTELY A COMPLETE LOTTERY.
IT'S RUSSIAN ROULETTE.
YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT SORT OF
VESSEL YOU'RE GETTING INTO.
THERE HAVE BEEN HORRENDOUS
STORIES OF TRAFFICKERS BEATING
PEOPLE DOWN INTO THE HOLDS OF
BOATS, AND IT JUST TAKES A SMALL
SHIFT IN THE BALANCE OF A BOAT
WITH PEOPLE RUSHING TO ONE SIDE
OR THE OTHER FOR IT TO TIP OVER
BECAUSE THEY'RE ALL SO HEAVILY
OVERCROWDED.
SO, THERE ARE MANY PARENTS
TAKING THE DECISION THAT IT'S
NOT WORTH RISKING THEIR
CHILDREN'S LIVES, AND THEY'RE
LEAVING THEM BEHIND AND THEY'RE
COMING TO COUNTRIES WHERE'S THEY
HOPE THERE WILL BE A GOOD FAMILY
REUNIFICATION POLICY, AS
SWEDEN HAS.
BUT MR. AL HABASH, FOR EXAMPLE,
HAS BEEN WAITING FOR TEN MONTHS.
>> Stewart: THE WAR IN SYRIA
HAS BEEN GOING ON FOR YEARS, BUT
WHAT HAS BEEN THE CATALYST FOR
ALL THESE PEOPLE LEAVING NOW?
>> I THINK THERE ARE TWO THINGS,
AS FAR AS WE CAN SEE, REALLY.
RIGHT NOW, IT'S THE END OF THE
SUMMER, AND THE MEDITERRANEAN
SUDDENLY CHANGES FROM BEING A
FAIRLY BENEVOLENT SEA AS IT HAS
BEEN IN THE PAST THREE MONTHS
INTO SOMETHING THAT IS VERY
PERILOUS INDEED.
THERE'S A WIND THAT BLOWS IN
SEPTEMBER THAT CREATES WINDS OF
FORCE 8-10, AND IT'S EXTREMELY
DANGEROUS.
EVEN JUST FOR THE THREE MILES
THAT IT TAKES YOU TO GET ACROSS
FROM THE TURKISH COAST TO AN
ISLAND LIKE LESBOS, FOR
EXAMPLE, THE WAVES CAN BE
INCREDIBLY HIGH, SO BAD THAT
GREEK FERRIES WON'T SAIL IN THIS
KIND OF WEATHER.
THERE IS A RUSH TO GET ACROSS
BEFORE THE WEATHER CHANGES.
BUT, ALSO, PEOPLE I HAVE BEEN
SPEAKING TO ON LESBOS, ONE OF
THE MAIN ISLANDS THAT THE PEOPLE
COME TO IN GREECE, THEY'RE
SAYING WHAT WE'RE HEARING FROM
THE SYRIANS IS THAT THE
SITUATION INSIDE DAMASCUS, THE
SYRIAN CAPITAL, IS BECOMING VERY
GRAVE, INDEED, AND THERE IS AN
IMPERATIVE TO GET OUT.
MAYBE THERE IS SOMETHING
HAPPENING ON THE VARIOUS
WARFRONTS THERE THAT IS DRIVING
PEOPLE OUT.
ALL OF THE REFUGEES THAT YOU
TALK TO ON THE VARIOUS STAGES OF
THE ROUTE, THEY'RE ALL IN TOUCH
WITH EACH OTHER.
THEY KNOW WHICH PLACES ARE-- YOU
KNOW, THE WAYS TO GO.
THEY'RE GETTING MESSAGES
BACKWARDS AND FORWARDS, AND, YOU
KNOW, THEY MUST BE SORT OF ABLE
TO READ THE RUNES TO SEE EUROPE
IS WAVERING AT THE MOMENT.
COUNTRIES DON'T WANT TO BE ON
THE WRONG SIDE OF HISTORY
BECAUSE THIS IS A VERY EMOTIONAL
TIME FOR PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY
AFTER THE PUBLICATION OF THAT
TERRIBLE PICTURE OF THE LITTLE
BOY WHO DROWNED IN BODRUM.
>> Stewart: FROM YOUR
REPORTING-- YOU'VE TALKED TO
FOLKS WHO WERE BUSINESSMEN-- AND
FROM OTHER STORIES THAT I'VE
READ, THERE SEEMS TO BE A
MIDDLE-CLASS AND UPPER-MIDDLE-
CLASS MOVEMENT HERE OF PEOPLE
DECIDING TO FINALLY LEAVE.
WHY ARE THEY FINALLY DECIDING TO
LEAVE?
WHY DID THEY STAY IN PLACE?
AND, TWO, WHAT DOES THIS MEAN
FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE MONEY
TO GET OUT?
>> THE ONE THING THAT IS REALLY
QUITE NOTICEABLE, ACTUALLY, IS
THAT ON THE ROAD, THE PEOPLE WHO
DO SEEM TO HAVE MONEY ARE
SYRIANS.
THEY ALL TALK ABOUT HAVING A
FAIRLY PROSPEROUS LIFESTYLE.
BUT IF YOU GO ON TO SOCIAL MEDIA
AND LOOK AT PEOPLE FROM HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH, FOR EXAMPLE,
THEY'VE BEEN POSTING PICTURES
SAYING IF YOU WONDER WHY IT IS
THAT PEOPLE ARE LEAVING NOW,
HAVE A LOOK AT THIS PHOTOGRAPH.
AND WHAT THEY'RE DOING IS
POSTING PICTURES OF PLACES LIKE
KOBANE, THE PLACE ON THE
TURKISH-SYRIAN BORDER WHERE
THERE WAS A MASSIVE BATTLE
BETWEEN ISIS AND THE KURDS, AND
THE PLACE IS COMPLETELY
FLATTENED.
THEY'RE ALSO POSTING PICTURES OF
HOMS, WHICH IS SYRIA'S THIRD
CITY, AND THE PLACE IS
ABSOLUTELY DEVASTATED.
IT LOOKS AS THOUGH THERE'S
NOTHING LEFT STANDING.
AND SO, HOW PEOPLE CAN STAY
THERE IS BEYOND BELIEF.
SOME OF THE COOLER HEADS IN
EUROPE WOULD SAY, WELL, HANG ON
A MINUTE.
THOSE PEOPLE COMING FROM SYRIA,
YOU KNOW, THEY'RE NOT COMING
DIRECTLY FROM THE WAR.
ONCE THEY GOT OUT OF THE COUNTRY
THEY'VE BEEN IN SAFER PLACES
LIKE IN TURKEY, LIKE IN JORDAN,
SO THEY'RE NOT EXACTLY RUNNING
AWAY FROM WAR.
THEY WANT TO GET AWAY FROM THAT
PARTICULAR AREA.
BUT THEN YOU TALK TO PEOPLE IN
THE REFUGEE AGENCIES AND OTHERS
WHO HAVE BEEN TO THAT AREA AND
SAY YOU JUST CANNOT STAY IN
THESE TERRIBLE CONDITIONS IN THE
REFUGEE CAMPS ON FRONT LINE
STATES BECAUSE TEMPERATURES ARE
JUST ABSOLUTELY APPALLING.
THE CONDITIONS ARE NOT GREAT,
AND THAT'S WHY THERE'S THIS BIG
SHIFT TOWARDS EUROPE.
>> Stewart: MALCOLM BRABANT,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR SHARING
YOUR REPORTING.
ONE WAY MIGRANTS GET TO AND
THROUGH EUROPE IS WITH THE HELP
OF SMUGGLERS WHO OFFER PASSAGE
ON RICKETY BOATS, BY TAXI AND
TRUCK, AND EVEN BY CHARTERED
AIRCRAFT, ALL FOR A PRICE.
A TRUCK WITH 71 DEAD MIGRANTS
FOUND ALONG AN AUSTRIAN HIGHWAY
LAST WEEK CALLED ATTENTION TO
THE DANGERS OF SMUGGLING.
IN THE LIBYAN COASTAL CITY OF
ZUWARA YESTERDAY, 300 PEOPLE
PROTESTED THE HUMAN TRAFFICKING
AND THE RASH OF MIGRANTS DYING
ON THEIR SHORE.
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER
MICHAEL BIRNBAUM HAS
INVESTIGATED THE MIGRANT
SMUGGLING TRADE AND JOINS ME NOW
VIA SKYPE FROM BRUSSELS.
MICHAEL, WHEN DID THIS KICK INTO
HIGH GEAR AS A TRUE, FULL-
FLEDGED BUSINESS?
>> WELL, THIS HAS BEEN AN
EVOLVING TRANSFORMATION OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF YEARS AS THIS
TREMENDOUS FLOW OF REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS HAS INCREASED INTO
EUROPE.
BUT WHAT WE'VE SEEN IS THAT A
LOT OF PREEXISTING CRIMINAL
NETWORKS, ESPECIALLY IN EASTERN
EUROPE, HAVE SORT OF JUST
CHANGED THEIR BUSINESS.
THEY SEE THIS AS A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY, AND NOW THEY'RE
OFFERING THEIR SERVICES TO
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO MAKE IT INTO
WESTERN EUROPE.
>> Stewart: AND I HAVE TO
IMAGINE THE INTERNET HAS PLAYED
A ROLE IN THIS EXPLODING.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S NOW EASIER THAN EVER, IF
YOU ARE A MIGRANT OR IF YOU ARE
A REFUGEE, JUST TO LOOK,
PARTICULARLY ON FACEBOOK.
THERE ARE SMUGGLERS WHO JUST
ADVERTISE THEIR SERVICES VERY
OPENLY, USUALLY IN ARABIC, ON
FACEBOOK.
YOU CAN LOOK, YOU CAN FIND
PROMISES OF PASSAGE FOR, YOU
KNOW, WHATEVER KIND OF LEVEL OF
SERVICE YOU WANT, BUT TYPICALLY
FROM TURKISH REFUGEE CAMPS TO
PARTICULAR COUNTRIES INSIDE
EUROPE.
AND THOSE PRICES RANGE ANYWHERE
FROM $2,500 UP TO $10,000 OR
EVEN MORE.
>> Stewart: WITHOUT BEING FLIP,
I'M GOING TO USE THE WORD
"MENU."
THERE ARE PRACTICALLY MENUS OF
OPTIONS FOR PEOPLE OUT THERE.
>> Reporter: WELL, THERE ARE A
COUPLE DIFFERENT WAYS-- THEY
REALLY DO LOOK LIKE MENUS.
THERE ARE ENTIRE LISTS THAT JUST
GO DOWN WITH DIFFERENT PRICES.
AND THE CHOICES RANGE BOTH FROM
THE COUNTRY THAT YOU GO TO, THE
COUNTRIES THAT ARE PARTICULARLY
DESIRABLE ARE GERMANY AND
SWEDEN.
THEY'VE BEEN THE MOST OPEN TO
REFUGEES.
AND THEN THE LEVEL OF SERVICE
ALONG THE WAY.
SO THAT CAN RANGE ANYTHING FROM
BELOW DECK ON A RICKETY FISHING
BOAT COMING UP FROM EGYPT OR
LIBYA THAT WILL TAKE YOU TO A
GREEK OR ITALIAN ISLAND IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN.
AND I SPOKE TO A SWEDISH POLICE
OFFICIAL WHO TOLD ME THAT IN ONE
INSTANCE, THERE WAS EVEN A
PRIVATE CHARTER JET THAT TOOK
OFF FROM ISTANBUL, JUST FLEW
STRAIGHT INTO STOCKHOLM, AND
WHEN PEOPLE LANDED, THEY CLAIMED
ASYLUM RIGHT WHEN THEY HIT THE
TARMAC.
>> Stewart: WHAT ARE PEOPLE
DOING, WHAT ARE COUNTRIES DOING
TO COMBAT THE SMUGGLING?
>> WELL, JUST IN THE LAST WEEK,
WEEK AND A HALF, AUSTRIA IN
PARTICULAR, WHERE THE 71 PEOPLE
WERE FOUND DEAD ON THE SIDE OF A
HIGHWAY, HAS SIGNIFICANTLY
INCREASED HIGHWAY CONTROLS.
THEY HAVE BEEN SEARCHING
BASICALLY ALL TRUCKS AND VANS
THAT ARE ENTERING AUSTRIA FROM
HUNGARY.
THAT'S BEEN A BIG EFFORT THAT
TAKES A LOT OF WORK.
THEY HAVE BEEN FINDING MORE
INSTANCES OF PEOPLE SMUGGLING,
INCLUDING A COUPLE OF VERY
DANGEROUS SITUATIONS WHEN PEOPLE
WERE, INDEED, LOCKED INTO THE
BACK OF THESE VEHICLES WITHOUT
MUCH AIR.
BUT IT'S A TREMENDOUS CHALLENGE,
AND, YOU KNOW, I WAS SPEAKING TO
A COLLEAGUE OF MINE WHO IS IN
HUNGARY TODAY WHERE THERE'S YET
ANOTHER CRISIS, AND ALL OF THOSE
AUSTRIAN POLICE WHO HAVE BEEN
DOING THAT HAVE BEEN TASKED
TODAY WITH OTHER JOBS TRYING TO
PROCESS JUST THE TREMENDOUS
INFLOW OF ASYLUM SEEKERS WHO ARE
COMING IN.
>> Stewart: MICHAEL BIRNBAUM
FROM THE "WASHINGTON POST,"
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME
TODAY.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR HAVING
ME.
>> Stewart: LEARN ABOUT THE
FISHERMEN WHO HAVE FOUND
THEMSELVES ON THE FRONT LINES OF
THE MIGRANT CRISIS ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
ACCORDING TO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, NATIVE AMERICAN
WOMEN ARE 2.5 TIMES MORE LIKELY
THAN OTHER WOMEN IN THE U.S. TO
BE SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIMS.
OFTEN, THE ASSAILANTS ARE NOT
NATIVE AMERICANS, EVEN ON INDIAN
RESERVATIONS.
BECAUSE OF A LEGAL LOOPHOLE,
NON-NATIVE PERPETRATORS HAVE
COMMONLY BEEN ABLE TO ESCAPE
PROSECUTION FOR CRIMES COMMITTED
ON RESERVATIONS.
IN TONIGHT'S "SIGNATURE
SEGMENT," WE LOOK AT THE NEW
FEDERAL LAW GIVING INDIAN TRIBAL
COURTS THE ABILITY TO BRING
THOSE WHO COMMIT THESE CRIMES TO
JUSTICE.
NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS THIS
UPDATED STORY.
>> Reporter: LISA BRUNNER SPENT
HER CHILDHOOD ON AND AROUND THE
WHITE EARTH INDIAN RESERVATION,
A HUGE TRACT OF LAND IN NORTHERN
MINNESOTA THAT'S HOME TO AROUND
4,000 NATIVE AMERICANS LIKE HER.
BRUNNER GREW UP SURROUNDED BY
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SINCE HAS
BECOME A LEADING ADVOCATE FOR
NATIVE VICTIMS OF ABUSE.
>> IT'S HAPPENING EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: NATIVE WOMEN IN THE
U.S. FACE SOME OF THE HIGHEST
LEVELS OF VIOLENCE OF ANY GROUP.
ACCORDING TO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, ONE IN THREE NATIVE
WOMEN HAS BEEN RAPED, AND THREE
OUT OF FIVE WILL EXPERIENCE
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN THEIR
LIFETIMES.
LISA SAYS SHE TOO IS A VICTIM OF
BOTH RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT.
SHE HAD ENOUGH, SHE SAYS, WHEN A
BOYFRIEND SLAPPED HER ACROSS THE
FACE WHILE SHE CRADLED HER NINE-
MONTH-OLD CHILD.
>> AND I PACKED UP AND LEFT THE
NEXT DAY, AND I NEVER WENT BACK.
AND I VOWED THEREAFTER THAT NO
MAN WILL EVER TOUCH ME AGAIN.
I WILL NOT... MY BABIES WILL NOT
KNOW THE LIFE THAT I HAD TO
SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: BRUNNER SAYS THAT
AS AN ADULT, SHE SELDOM WENT TO
THE POLICE AND THAT MUCH OF THAT
HAS TO DO WITH THE FACT THAT
SOME OF THE MEN WHO ATTACKED HER
WERE NOT NATIVE AMERICANS.
SO, WHY DOES THAT MATTER?
UP UNTIL RECENTLY, NON-NATIVE
PEOPLE WERE IMMUNE FROM
PROSECUTION IN TRIBAL COURTS.
THAT'S CRUCIAL FOR TWO REASONS:
ONE, THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT SAYS
NON-NATIVE MEN COMMIT THE VAST
MAJORITY OF ASSAULTS AND RAPES
AGAINST NATIVE WOMEN; AND TWO,
FEDERAL ATTORNEYS, WHO ARE OFTEN
THE ONLY LAWYERS WHO CAN TRY
NON-NATIVES WHO COMMIT CRIMES ON
RESERVATIONS, OFTEN DON'T
PROSECUTE THEM.
>> I KNEW WHEN I HAD BEEN RAPED
AND BEEN VICTIMIZED AND WHATNOT,
I NEVER TRIED TO REPORT IT
BECAUSE NOTHING... I KNEW
NOTHING WOULD EVER HAPPEN.
I KNEW NOTHING WOULD BE DONE.
>> WHEN YOU HAVE THE COMBINATION
OF THE SILENCE THAT COMES FROM
VICTIMS WHO LIVE IN FEAR AND A
LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY BY
OUTSIDE JURISDICTIONS TO
PROSECUTE THAT CRIME, YOU'VE
CREATED, IF YOU WILL, THE
PERFECT STORM FOR DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT,
WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT ALL THE
STATISTICS WOULD SORT OF BEAR
OUT.
>> Reporter: IN A 1978 DECISION,
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT SAID
INDIAN TRIBES WITH THEIR OWN
TRIBAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS AND
COURTS WERE NOT ALLOWED TO
CHARGE NON-INDIANS UNLESS
CONGRESS CHANGED THE LAW.
CONGRESS DIDN'T ACT FOR 35
YEARS.
THEN, TWO YEARS AGO, WHEN
CONGRESS REAUTHORIZED THE
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT, THE
VAWA, LAWMAKERS GRANTED TRIBAL
COURTS JURISDICTION OVER A
LIMITED NUMBER OF DOMESTIC AND
DATING VIOLENCE CRIMES COMMITTED
BY NON-INDIANS ON RESERVATIONS.
THAT CHANGE TOOK EFFECT IN
MARCH.
EARLIER, THREE INDIAN
RESERVATIONS HAD TAKEN PART IN A
PILOT PROGRAM FOR THOSE
PROSECUTIONS: ONE IN ARIZONA;
ONE IN OREGON; AND THIS INDIAN
RESERVATION, THE TULALIP
RESERVATION, AN HOUR'S DRIVE
NORTH OF SEATTLE.
THERESA POULEY, WHO HAS SERVED
AS CHIEF JUDGE ON THE TULALIP
TRIBAL COURT SINCE 2009, SAYS
THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROSECUTE
OFFENDERS ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS
BELONGS TO TRIBAL COURTS.
>> THE CONFUSED JURISDICTION IN
INDIAN COUNTRY, WHICH LEAVES
THOSE RESPONSIBILITIES
OFTENTIMES TO THE STATE AND
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WHO DON'T
EFFECTIVELY PROSECUTE THOSE
CRIMES, CREATES THIS PLACE WHERE
YOU HAVE A CATEGORY OF PEOPLE ON
INDIAN RESERVATIONS WHO ARE
ESSENTIALLY ABOVE THE LAW.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES THIS
TRIBAL PROVISION IN VAWA DO TO
HELP CLOSE THAT GAP?
>> IT ALLOWS ME TO TREAT ALL
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PERPETRATORS
EXACTLY THE SAME, INDIAN OR NON-
INDIAN.
SO, I HAVE AUTHORITY OVER
INDIANS WHO COMMIT THAT CRIME;
THIS JUST GIVES ME AUTHORITY
OVER NON-INDIANS WHO COMMIT THE
EXACT SAME CRIME.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST 17
MONTHS, THE TULALIP TRIBAL
PROSECUTOR HAS BROUGHT CHARGES
AGAINST NINE ALLEGED NON-INDIAN
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE DEFENDANTS;
FIVE PLEADED GUILTY, TWO AWAIT
TRIAL, ONE WAS REFERRED TO
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS, AND ONE
CASE WAS DISMISSED.
BUT WILL THIS NEW AUTHORITY
ACTUALLY HELP STOP THE CRISIS OF
VIOLENCE AGAINST INDIAN WOMEN?
ONE CONCERN: THE NEW LAW ONLY
COVERS DOMESTIC AND DATING
VIOLENCE; IT DOES NOT INCLUDE
CRIMES LIKE ASSAULT BY A
STRANGER OR EVEN RAPE.
MICHELLE DEMMERT IS THE TULALIP
TRIBE'S LEAD ATTORNEY.
>> UNFORTUNATELY, IT'S NOT QUITE
GONE FAR ENOUGH.
IN JUST THREE RECENT CASES, WE
HAD CHILDREN INVOLVED, AND WE'RE
NOT ABLE TO CHARGE ON THE CRIMES
THAT WERE COMMITTED AGAINST
THOSE CHILDREN, INCLUDING
ENDANGERMENT, CRIMINAL
ENDANGERMENT, POSSIBLY ASSAULT,
OTHER ATTENDANT OR COLLATERAL
CRIMES.
>> Reporter: YOU'RE ABLE TO
PROSECUTE ONE CRIME BUT NOT THE
OTHER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT'S RIGHT.
>> WHAT WE HAVE ALLOWED IS THE
AUTHORITY FOR TRIBAL COURSE TO
TRY U.S. CITIZENS IN THEIR COURT
FOR VERY GOOD REASONS.
>> Reporter: FORMER U.S. SENATOR
TOM COBURN, FROM OKLAHOMA, A
STATE WITH ONE OF THE HIGHEST
NATIVE AMERICAN POPULATIONS, CO-
SPONSORED THE ORIGINAL VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN ACT 20 YEARS AGO,
AND HE THINKS THE CHANGE IN THE
LAW IS WRONG, THAT TRIBES SHOULD
NOT BE ALLOWED TO EXERT THEIR
AUTHORITY OVER NON-INDIANS.
>> YOU CANNOT CAST TRIBAL
SOVEREIGNTY ON ME.
I'M NOT A MEMBER OF THE TRIBE.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD OF GRANTING
EXPANDED AUTHORITY TO TRIBAL
COURTS, COBURN SAYS CONGRESS
SHOULD HAVE REQUIRED FEDERAL
PROSECUTORS TO TAKE ON DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE CRIMES ON RESERVATIONS
MORE VIGOROUSLY.
COBURN ALSO BELIEVES THE NEW LAW
COULD BE FOUND UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
>> THERE'S NO WAY YOU CAN ASSURE
AND GUARANTEE CONSTITUTIONAL
PROVISIONS UNDER WHAT PASSED.
SO, THIS PROVISION WILL
EVENTUALLY BE THROWN OUT, BE
CHALLENGED, AND ON APPEAL
THEY'LL LOSE BECAUSE YOU CANNOT
GUARANTEE AMERICAN CITIZENS
THEIR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS IF
THEY'RE NON-TRIBAL MEMBERS IN A
TRIBAL COURT.
>> Reporter: BUT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S SAM HIRSCH SAYS ANY
TRIBE THAT PROCEEDS WITH
PROSECUTIONS MUST ADHERE TO A
LIST OF CONSTITUTIONAL
GUARANTEES LAID OUT IN THE NEW
LAW.
>> HERE'S THE EVIDENCE THAT IT'S
WORKING: UNDER THE PILOT
PROJECT, MORE THAN TWO DOZEN
NON-INDIANS HAVE NOW BEEN
CHARGED WITH DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
AND DATING VIOLENCE CRIMES.
THEY ALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO GO
STRAIGHT TO FEDERAL COURT AND
ASK TO BE RELEASED IF THEIR
RIGHTS ARE BEING VIOLATED.
AND HOW MANY HAVE DONE SO?
ZERO.
>> Reporter: SO FAR?
>> SO FAR.
>> Reporter: HIRSCH CONCEDES THE
LAW IS LIMITED, ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE IT ONLY COVERS DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AND NOT MORE SERIOUS
CRIMES.
BUT HE SAYS THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS STEPPING UP ITS
PROSECUTION RATE AGAINST NON-
NATIVES.
>> AT THE SAME TIME, WE HAVE TO
RECOGNIZE THAT WHEN FEDERAL
PROSECUTORS AND F.B.I. AGENTS
ARE OFTEN LOCATED HUNDREDS OF
MILES AWAY, MANY HOURS' DRIVE
AWAY, IT'S VERY HARD FOR THEM TO
PLAY THE ROLE OF LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT, ESPECIALLY ON
MISDEMEANOR LEVEL CRIMES AND
LOWER-LEVEL FELONIES.
>> Reporter: IN THE YEARS
LEADING UP TO THE TULALIP
RESERVATION'S ABILITY TO
PROSECUTE NON-INDIANS, CHIEF
JUDGE THERESA POULEY SAYS SHE'S
ALREADY SEEN ONE MARK OF
SUCCESS.
>> THE REPORTING OF DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT
CASES HAVE GONE UP AT TULALIP
FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS
STEADILY AS VICTIMS KNOW THAT
PERPETRATORS WILL BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
AND AS THEY KNOW THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO BE LISTENED OR HEARD,
THEY ACTUALLY REPORT IT MORE
OFTEN.
SO, IF YOU JUST LOOK AT THE
NUMBERS, YOU SORT OF SEE THAT IT
CHANGES THE LEVEL OF REPORTING,
AND THAT'S REALLY THE FIRST STEP
TOWARDS STOPPING IT.
>> Reporter: BACK ON THE WHITE
EARTH RESERVATION, LISA BRUNNER
IS STILL CONCERNED ABOUT THE
LIMITATIONS OF THE NEW LAW, THAT
IT DOESN'T COVER CRIMES LIKE
RAPE.
IT'S ESPECIALLY PERSONAL BECAUSE
SHE SAYS ONE OF HER DAUGHTERS
WAS RAPED A FEW YEARS AGO BY
NON-NATIVE MEN WHO CAME ON TO
THE RESERVATION.
>> OF COURSE, THEY THREATENED
HER, AND SHE DIDN'T TELL ME
UNTIL AFTER THE FACT.
BUT WE DID REPORT IT TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT, AND THAT WAS IT.
>> Reporter: NOTHING HAPPENED
AFTER THAT?
>> NO.
NOTHING.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST SIX
MONTHS SINCE INDIAN TRIBES
OBTAINED THE AUTHORITY TO
PROSECUTE NON-INDIAN DEFENDANTS,
FIVE TRIBES HAVE DONE SO AND
MORE PLAN TO JOIN THEM.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: THE U.S. FOREST
SERVICE IS WARNING CAMPERS IN
CALIFORNIA TO HEAD FAR SOUTH OF
A WILDFIRE BURNING EAST OF
FRESNO.
THE SO-CALLED "ROUGH FIRE" HAS
SCORCHED 134 SQUARE MILES,
MAKING IT THE BIGGEST OF THIS
SUMMER'S FIRES IN THE DROUGHT-
RIDDEN STATE.
THIS FIRE, SPARKED BY A
LIGHTNING STRIKE FIVE WEEKS AGO,
IS 25% CONTAINED.
ALL CAMPGROUNDS AND LODGES IN
KINGS CANYON NATIONAL PARK ARE
NOW CLOSED.
CAMPERS AND HIKERS ARE ADVISED
TO HEAD FOR THE MOUNTAINS SOUTH
OF THE PARK TO AVOID THE SMOKE.
IN JAPAN, RESIDENTS ARE
RETURNING TO A TOWN THEY FLED
BECAUSE OF THE FUKUSHIMA NUCLEAR
POWER PLANT DISASTER FOUR AND
HALF YEARS AGO.
NARAHA, 12 MILES FROM FUKUSHIMA,
IS THE FIRST OF SEVEN ABANDONED
TOWNS TO HAVE ITS EVACUATION
ORDER LIFTED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
BUT HALF OF THE TOWN'S FORMER
7,000 RESIDENTS SAY THEY'RE NOT
READY TO GO BACK MAINLY DUE TO
CONCERNS ABOUT RADIATION.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SAID IT WILL
GIVE OUT RADIATION METERS TO
RESIDENTS AND MONITOR THE LOCAL
WATER SUPPLY.
FUKUSHIMA EXPERIENCED A MELTDOWN
AND RELEASE OF RADIOACTIVE GAS
AFTER A MARCH 2011 EARTHQUAKE
AND TSUNAMI KNOCKED ITS POWER
OUT.
A HACKER FROM LATVIA FACES A TWO
YEAR U.S. PRISON SENTENCE FOR
CREATING A COMPUTER VIRUS THAT
INFECTED OVER A MILLION
COMPUTERS WORLDWIDE.
DENISS CALOVSKIS PLEADED GUILTY
YESTERDAY IN MANHATTAN FEDERAL
COURT TO WRITING CODE FOR THE
"GOZI" VIRUS, WHICH STOLE
PERSONAL BANK ACCOUNT
INFORMATION.
PROSECUTORS SAY THE SCHEME
ROBBED BANKS OF TENS OF MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS BETWEEN 2005 AND
2012.
THE VIRUS INFECTED 40,000 U.S.
COMPUTERS.
CALOVSKIS IS THE SECOND HACKER
CONVICTED IN THE SCHEME.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TOMORROW, DOES REQUIRING EXTRA
READING TIME AFTER SCHOOL
IMPROVE STUDENTS' PROFICIENCY?
>> WE WANT TO HONE IN ON THE
READING SKILLS AND THEN JUST
PUSH THE STUDENTS ACADEMICALLY
AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
>> Stewart: AND FINALLY, TOYOTA
IS INVESTING $50 MILLION IN
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND
ROBOTICS.
THE MONEY IS NOT TO DEVELOP
SELF-DRIVING CARS.
INSTEAD, IT WILL GO TO STANFORD
AND M.I.T. OVER THE NEXT FIVE
YEARS TO CREATE TECHNOLOGY THAT
WILL HELP DRIVERS STAY ALERT AND
AVOID ACCIDENTS.
AND QUEEN ELIZABETH IS ON THE
VERGE OF BECOMING BRITAIN'S
LONGEST SERVING MONARCH.
THE 89-YEAR-OLD QUEEN, SEEN HERE
IN SCOTLAND TODAY, WAS CROWNED
AT THE ABLE OF 25 IN 1952.
COME WEDNESDAY, SHE WILL HAVE
REIGNED FOR 63 YEARS AND SEVEN
MONTHS, PASSING QUEEN VICTORIA,
WHO REIGNED FROM 1837-1901.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING, AND GOOD
NIGHT.